The Hobbit, or There and Back
John Ronald Reuel Tolkien


Here is the most beloved fairy tale for children in the most beloved design by Mikhail Belomlinsky and in the beautiful translation by Natalia Rakhmanova, familiar to everyone. It is from her that the acquaintance with the wonderful world of Middle-earth begins. But the majestic trilogy about the Ring of Omnipotence will happen a little later, and now an Adventure is about to knock on the hobbit Bilbo's cozy hole, and he, in the company of dwarves and the wizard Gandalf, will go on a long journey in search of missing treasures…





John Tolkien

The Hobbit, or There and Back



John R. R. Tolkien

The Hobbit

or There and Back again



Originally published in the English language by HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

Published with permission from HarperCollins Publishers Limited and Andrew Nurnberg Literary Agency.



© The J. R. R. Tolkien, Copiright Trust, 1937, 1951, 1966, 1978

© N. Rakhmanova, translated into Russian

© M. Belomlinsky, illustrations

© Translation of poems. I. Komarova, G. Usova

© AST Publishing House, LLC


* * *













1. Unexpected guests







Once upon a time there was a hobbit in a hole under the ground. Not in some nasty dirty damp hole where worm tails stick out from all sides and there is a nasty smell of mold, but also not in a dry sandy bare hole where there is nothing to sit on and nothing to eat. No, it was a hobbit hole, which means it was well–maintained.

It began with a perfectly round door, like a porthole, painted green, with a shining brass handle right in the middle. The door opened inward into a long corridor that looked like a railway tunnel, but a tunnel without burning and without smoke and also very well-maintained: the walls were paneled, the floor was tiled and carpeted, there were polished chairs along the walls, and hooks for hats and coats were nailed everywhere, because the hobbit loved guests. The tunnel wound on and on and went quite deep, but not into the very depths of the Hill, as the inhabitants called it, for many miles in circumference. There were doors on both sides of the tunnel–many, many round doors. The Hobbit did not recognize climbing stairs: bedrooms, bathrooms, cellars, storerooms (a whole bunch of storerooms), dressing rooms (the hobbit set aside several rooms for storing clothes), kitchens, dining rooms were located on the same floor and, moreover, in the same corridor. The best rooms were on the left, and only they had windows–deep-set round windows overlooking the garden and the distant meadows that descended to the river.

Our hobbit was a very wealthy hobbit named Baggins. The Bagginses had lived in the vicinity of the Hill since time immemorial and were considered a very respectable family, not only because they were rich, but also because nothing had ever happened to them and they did not allow themselves anything unexpected: you could always guess in advance, without asking what exactly one or another Baggins would say on this or that for a different reason. But we will tell you the story of how one of the Baggins was dragged into adventures and, to his own surprise, he began to say the most unexpected things and do the most unexpected things. He may have lost the respect of his neighbors, but he has gained... however, you will see for yourself whether he has gained in the end or not.

The mother of our hobbit... by the way, who is a hobbit? Perhaps it is worth telling about hobbits in more detail, since in our time they have become rare and shun the High People, as they call us humans. They are a small people themselves, about half our height and shorter than the bearded dwarves. Hobbits don't have beards. There is nothing magical about them either, except for the magical ability to disappear quickly and silently in cases when all sorts of stupid, clumsy big men like you and me are crashing like elephants. Hobbits have a fat belly; they dress brightly, mostly in green and yellow; they do not wear shoes, because they have naturally hard leather soles and thick warm brown fur on their feet, as well as on their heads. Only on his head he curls. Hobbits have long, dexterous dark fingers on their hands, good-natured faces; they laugh with a thick, deep laugh (especially after lunch, and they usually dine twice a day, if possible).

Now you know enough, and you can continue.

As I said, the mother of our hobbit, that is, Bilbo Baggins, was the legendary Belladonna Tuck, one of the three memorable daughters of Old Tuck, the head of the Hobbits who lived On the Other Side of the River, that is, the rivulet that flowed at the foot of the Hill. It was rumored that a long time ago, one of the Tuks took a wife from the elves. Nonsense, of course, but even so far there really was something not quite Hobbit-like about all the Tooks: from time to time someone from the Took clan would go on an adventure. He disappeared quite delicately, and the family tried to hush up the matter. But the fact remains that the Tooks were not considered as respectable as the Bagginses, although they were undoubtedly richer.

However, it cannot be said that after Belladonna Tuck married Mr. Bango Baggins, she ever went on an adventure. Bango, the father of the hero of our story, built for her (and partly with her money) a luxurious hobbit hole, the most luxurious of which was neither Under the Hill, nor Over the Hill, nor On the Other Side of the River, and they lived there for the rest of their days. And yet it is quite possible that Bilbo, her only son, in appearance and all habits an exact copy of his respectable respectable father, inherited from the Tooks some kind of oddity that was just waiting for an opportunity to show itself. Such a case did not come up for a long time, so Bilbo Baggins managed to become an adult hobbit, about fifty years old; he lived and lived in a beautiful hobbit hole built by his father, in the very one that I described in such detail at the beginning of the chapter, and it seemed that he would not move anywhere.

But it so happened that one day in the quiet of the morning, in those distant times when there was much less noise and more greenery in the world, and Hobbits were numerous and prosperous, Bilbo Baggins stood in the doorway after breakfast and smoked his wooden pipe, so long that it almost touched his shaggy legs (by the way, carefully combed with a brush). And just at that time Gandalf was passing by.

Gandalf! If you have heard at least a quarter of what I have heard about him, and I have heard only a small fraction of what is being told about him, then you would be prepared for any most incredible story. Stories and adventures sprang up like mushrooms wherever he appeared. He had not been in these parts for a long time, in fact, since the day his friend Old Tuck died, and the Hobbits had already forgotten what Gandalf looked like. He had been away on his own business since they were all Hobbits.

So that morning, an unsuspecting Bilbo just saw an old man with a staff. The old man was wearing a tall pointed blue hat, a long gray cloak, a silver scarf, huge black boots, and he also had a long white beard below the waist.

– Good morning! – said Bilbo, meaning to say exactly that it was a good morning: the sun was shining brightly and the grass was green. But Gandalf shot him a sharp look from under his thick shaggy eyebrows.

– What do you mean by that? - he asked. – Just wish me a good morning? Or are you saying that it's a good morning today – it doesn't matter what I think about it? Or do you mean that everyone should be kind this morning?

–Both,– said Bilbo. – And also that it's great to smoke a pipe in the air on such a wonderful morning. If you have a pipe, sit down, try my tobacco! There is no hurry, the whole day is ahead!

And Bilbo sat down on a bench near the door, crossed his legs and blew out a beautiful gray ring of smoke; it rose up and floated away over the Hill.

– Lovely! – But I don't have time to make rings today. I am looking for a participant in the adventure that I am arranging now, but it is not so easy to find him.

– Of course, in our area! We are a simple peaceful people, we do not like adventures. Brr, they're nothing but worry and trouble! They might also make you late for lunch! I don't understand what they find good in them," said our Mr. Baggins, and putting his thumb behind his suspender, he released the ring again, even more luxurious. Then he took the morning mail out of the drawer and began to read, pretending to have forgotten about the old man. He decided that he did not inspire confidence, and hoped that the old man would go his own way. But he did not think to leave. He stood leaning on his staff and, without saying a word, looked at the hobbit for so long that Bilbo was completely confused and even a little angry.

– Good morning to you! – He said at last. – We don't need adventures here, thank you! Look for companions Over The Hill or Across The River.








He wanted to make it clear that the conversation was over.

"What good morning is for you," said Gandalf, "and now it means that it's time for me to get out."

– What are you, what are you, my dear sir! Let me... I don't think I have the honor of knowing your name.…

"Yes, you have, my dear sir, but I know yours, Mr. Bilbo Baggins, and you are mine, although you do not remember that this is me. I am Gandalf, and Gandalf is me! To think what I've come to: the son of Belladonna Tuck gets rid of me with his "good morning", as if I were peddling buttons!

